Most of us were taught to avoid fighting
in relationships at all costs. But as it
turns out, the only way to have a truly
great relationship is to lean into the
tension when it arises. In this video,
Joe Hudson, the co-founder of The Art of
Accomplishment, shares everything he has
learned about how to have great fights
in a relationship. All you need to do is
watch, apply the lessons that resonate,
and see how your relationships
transform.
I remember this time with my wife. We we
had gone through this phase of fighting
all the time. I mean our fights were so
horrific and we had learned that the
fights were just basically verbal abuse
that we were abusing each other. And so
we had like stopped fighting and we
started tracking our relationship by
like how often we fought, right? So it
was like we were doing good if we
weren't fighting as much and we were
doing worse if we were fighting more.
And nowadays that idea is like ludicrous
to us, right? And it's not like we don't
judge it by how much we fight. We judge
it by how we fight. That's how we're
judging our relationship. So we have
been in situations recently this
happened. We were like preparing for a
retreat. We're both tired. We're going
into this thing that's just like it's a
super intense thing. The retreats that
we do like we work from 7:30 in the
morning until 10:30 at night 7 days in a
row. And so it's definitely where we're
going to be like most afraid. And so we
have this fight and we do it wherever we
want to do it. We don't we don't hide
our fights. We just sort of like yeah
this is our fight. So we're having our
fight and we're doing it and we're doing
it in front of the folks that we like
are facilitating with.
Right. And the end of it was like this
three or four minute fight. In the end
of it I was like I'm I'm like it's
really hard to fight with you and I'm
I'm glad we resolved that. I love you.
And the two people who were there were
like that was a fight. They just like
they didn't they didn't even know it was
a fight. But for us it was a fight and
it was it was an important fight. And so
the reason that we don't judge it by how
often we fight anymore is because
fighting is really really important. And
the reason that it's important is
because it's like all life requires
tension. If I'm going to breathe, my
lungs have to have tension. If a cell is
going to exist, it has to have tension.
So, as we grow, as we live, as we're
alive, as we change as people, there's
going to be tension. And the more
transformation that we have in our
lives, the more tension there's going to
be there. And so, we need to address
that tension for us to be vital and
alive and healthy. There's this great
metaphor. And I think there's a guy who
wrote the black swan and he has this
idea that basically financial markets
need to have tension on a regular basis
for them to be healthy. And so he says
big collapses in the market happen
because little collapses aren't allowed
to happen because of monetary policy. As
that sounds weird, but an easier way to
think about it is we're healthy
physically because we physically give
ourselves tension through exercise. And
if we don't, then we're unhealthy and
the falls are really, really big. So any
kind of system requires kind of a
regular tension to stay healthy. And
it's the same in a marriage or in a
relationship. There's some tension
that's really required. The question is
how do you handle that tension? And
that's the really important part. But
but if you judge your relationship by
how many fights you have, well then
you're you're kind you have the wrong
metric for a healthy relationship. It's
how you fight. Are you fighting with
love? Are you fighting with an open
heart? Are you fighting with respect? Or
have you completely lost your nervous
system? Are you completely out of
control? Are you are you being abusive?
Are you being mean? Are you have you
lost yourself? Are you being who you
want to be in that fight?
So you some people might not even call
it a fight, but I'm going to call it a
fight here because it's just so
important that we have that friction in
a relationship. So the avoidance of the
friction is an amazingly detrimental
thing to a relationship because it
basically kills it. It stagnates it. And
so the having that friction is is just
critical. It's just how you have it
that's important.
So there was this couple that I was
working with at this one point. Both of
them, one was a high-powered lawyer, one
was a venture capitalist. The marriage
was just
like they would like fight over the
coffee maker. Like the grounds being
left at the espresso machine, you know
what I'm saying? Like it was like this
was their life. And they had clearly
loved each other at one point and and
their relationship was clearly hot at
one point. And now the sex was dead. And
it was like all about the interactions
of the kids and the administration of
life. And there was no intimacy. There
was no connection. There was no
storytelling. That like the whole thing
had just fallen apart. And they were
both incredibly scared to just tell each
other their truths because and and this
happens in almost all the relationships,
probably happens in yours, is that one
person is scared to tell their truth
because the other person's going to be
too fragile. It's like it's going to
hurt them. It's going to break them.
They're going to they're going to be
depressed for even longer or something
like that. And the other one isn't
scared to tell their truth because of
the anger. Oh, they're going to get
angry at me. They're going to yell at
me. they're going to be upset or they're
going to remove their love and then I'm
going to be chasing them for their love
and so I'm just not going to say the
thing that's important to me. I'm just
not going to say my truth and so they're
both not showing up to in this case they
both weren't showing up in the
relationship. And so they committed to
telling each other their truth which
means that there was going to be
conflict. It means that the fighting had
to happen but the fighting had to happen
differently. And so when they committed
to both one having um the fights in a
respectful manner and two speaking their
truth even when the other person might
be hurt. It was 6 months maybe eight
months and their whole relationship had
changed. And this is an incredibly
common story in the work that I do. It's
that you have to speak your truth in a
relationship despite what it might do to
somebody else. despite the idea that oh
I'm not being compassionate even though
you are. It's just maybe not nice or
it's not convenient or it's just an
emotional experience that you don't want
to have in the moment. But it's deeply
compassionate because showing up for a
person and saying this is where I'm at
so that they know where they're at. That
is compassion if you can do it with an
open heart, if you can do it lovingly.
And the trick there is just to do
that consistently all the time. It
doesn't have to be like here's my truth
right now. I have to tell
it. Yeah, it can be like, oh, I can wait
until, you know, they're rested. It can
be a Saturday. It doesn't have to be
urgent. And it doesn't have to be mean.
As a matter of fact, it should always be
done with an open heart. But the the
most important thing to get for a
relationship from being dead dormant to
moving in a place where there's love and
you want to be with each other again and
you're not feeling disempowered. You're
not feeling like you're [__] getting
apart, ripped apart every time you come
home. It's not like, "Oh [__] I got to
go home again." If you want to change
that relationship, the most important
step is speaking your truth and doing it
with respect.
One of the things that people like get
caught up in in fights is that they just
feel like they're completely out of
control. They're like, "What the hell?
I've completely lost myself. I don't
know what I'm doing." And we've all felt
this. We've all been in a situation
where it literally feels like somebody
animated us, like stuck their hand up us
and like made us like a puppet. And it
wasn't like it wasn't who we are. It
wasn't who we wanted to be. The
important thing to know about that is
that's trauma. So, think about it this
way. Someone's got PTSD, some known
known kind of trauma, and they were in a
war in Iraq, and there's big bombs going
off, and now they're in Cleveland, Ohio,
and a car backfires, and they think
they're back in Fallujah. The way trauma
works is it brings you back to a place
where you aren't right now. It brings
you back to the place where the trauma
happened and asks you to relive that
trauma. The whole fight, the whole
purpose of the whole thing is so that
you can actually process the emotions
that you couldn't process at the time of
the trauma. But what occurs instead is
we go, "Oh my god, we lost. We blah blah
blah blah." We don't feel anything. We
have the same reaction we did when we
had the trauma the first time. And so
this is a big capital T trauma. PTSD,
war, Fallujah. But there's other traumas
like, you know, every time I was scared,
my mom was like, "Be strong." So, I
never actually got nurtured in my fear.
And so, fear became the enemy. That's a
different kind of trauma. And now, when
I'm scared, fear is the enemy. I won't
feel that. I won't feel it in my
partner. My partner's scared. I'm trying
to control them so that they don't feel
fear. So, I don't feel it because I
don't want to feel it. And that's a
different kind of trauma. And I'm back
to my mom saying, "Hey, you have to be
strong. You're not allowed to have
fear." But what what the trauma is
asking me asking of me to heal is to
actually
feel to feel that fear that I didn't get
to feel when I was a kid. And so that's
how the nervous system just gets
hotwired, right? So you're just like and
off you go.
Now, there's a whole bunch of very cool
tricks on keeping your nervous system
calm. The easiest one is uh just
breathe. You can do box breath. You can
look that up. It's really easy. You can
just do six six breath is one of my
favorite. Just slow down your breath, be
conscious, and that can like totally
calm your nervous system. You can put
your hands on your body, feel your body,
that can completely calm your nervous
system. But the idea is when that's
happening, that's your opportunity. The
opportunity is calm your nervous system
so you can be back in yourself and then
feel the thing that you didn't get to
feel. And hopefully you've gotten far
enough with your partner where you can
have that kind of agreement like, "Oh,
I'm in my trauma. I need to feel some
[__] Oh, cool." And that's an amazing
thing. Like where Tara and I got to a
point in our fights where it was like,
"Oh, I recognize I'm not here right now.
I'm in my trauma. I need to feel my
stuff." Amazing thing happened. The
fight just ended. The fight was like,
"Oh, this is why we're having the fight.
The fight is for you to heal this
trauma. Great. You're in it. You see it.
I'm right here for you." And she would
just come to me and just be with me
while I felt it. And I would just come
to her and I just be with her while she
felt it. And it was just this every one
of our fights became a way to relieve
the trauma that put us in the place to
have the fight for the first
time. And I remember this story.
I love this story. So, my friend was in
this relationship. It was like he had
never been in a relationship
before that was long. Like he was like
one of those like one month sleep with
everybody, but he had he found this
relationship
and he was really into her and she broke
his heart and crushed
him. And we were sitting there talking
about it and he's like, "What do I do?"
And I'm like, "You cry. You [__]
grieve. you like and it's going to at
the beginning it's not going to be it's
going to be about the woman but at the
end you don't know what it's going to be
about. You're just going to cry. And so
he had he was doing this great river
restoration project and he had to drive
five hours every week one way and five
hours back to get to the river and he
would cry the whole way there and we'd
cry and we would talk like every other
week and he'd be like, "My god, the
sounds that are coming out of me. What
the fuck?"
And you know, week one and two was he
was crying over the loss. But then in
week three, four, five, he was crying
over what got him there. Like the
upbringing, the parents, the way he was
raised, his ideas of love, and he just
like kept on grieving. He grieved so
much stuff. And uh before this happened,
he was kind of overweight. His business
wasn't doing well. He was drinking too
much. And at the end of this like four
or five months of grieving, he was like
in shape and he he wasn't dating, but he
was in shape. His business was thriving
and he wasn't drinking. And it was an
amazing switch just because he had felt
all that trauma all the way through. And
so you can do that by breaking up, but
you can also do that in the
relationship. And it's really cool in a
relationship because part of the trauma
that we feel is that we were all alone
in it. And if you can use your
relationship and each one of those
fights to find where your trauma is and
then be supported in it so that you can
actually realize, oh, I'm not alone. I'm
allowed to feel this stuff. That is when
relationships like so much
transformation so quickly. So just like
my friend who went from, you know,
overweight, bad business, drinking too
much, like that happens in a
relationship. That's what happens in a
marriage. And it's [__]
amazing. So there's this guy that I was
coaching. He was, you know, like a
incredibly successful human being. He
had built like a like a multiple billion
dollar company. And when it came to his
marriage, he just didn't believe that he
could, you know, change the marriage.
And I said to him like, "So what is it
that makes you think that you could
like, oh, I I can build a$10 billion,
eight billion dollar company, but you
can't like fix a relationship?" like how
how does that mindset get in there? And
he I mean clearly didn't have an answer
for it, but it allowed him to see like,
oh wait, this is ridiculous the fact
that I I I don't think that I can shift
or change this relationship. And it's
the most critical thing if you're going
to start working on the relationship is
to actually have belief and faith that
there's change that's possible. If you
don't, then you'll be undermining
yourself the whole time. Just just
yesterday I was hanging out um watching
my daughter's volleyball game and I
watched like they were ahead and then
they were behind and I watched the
entire team their shoulders slumped.
They're like h we're not going to be
able to do this and they just got worse
and worse and worse and worse. They
didn't remember that they were at one
point like going in the right direction
and all all they did. And the father
next to me is like they're never going
to win like that. And you know it like
you if you've watched sports you've seen
this and you see where the mindset
changes. It doesn't like you just know
that there's loss on the horizon. And so
it's the same thing in a relationship.
And so the thing about a relationship
that's important or about trying to do
anything is the way that the brain works
is that we have something gosh I think
it's like the habenula and it's
basically an all vertebrae and it and it
prevents us from failing over and over
and over again. So let's say you're a
bear and you fought for rights to like
mate with another bear and you lost. You
don't want to like go and get your butt
kicked again and again and again. Or if
you keep on going to this one part of
this forest and you eat this mushroom,
you get sick. You won't don't want to do
it again and again. It's that part of
your brain and it's the thing that makes
us like when we're trying to diet and
then we like have that piece of
chocolate cake, we're like ah [__] it, I
failed and then like you just ah just
eat chocolate cake every day. That's the
part of the brain. And so you need to
know that going into the relationship.
And instead of having it like I'm going
to try this and if it doesn't work then
it's over. You need to think about it as
like oh here are the 10 20 experiments
that I'm going to do working with the
relationship. And it's much better if
it's together right like if both people
are saying hey let's work on this
relationship and that's what we want to
do. Then great. Then you both have it.
you both have the iterations so that
you're never failing. You're just trying
the next thing, trying the next thing.
That's going to work for you. If you're
in a situation where you're like, "Oh,
my boyfriend or girlfriend doesn't want
to work on the relationship with me."
Like, that's the conversation you have
to have. Like, if they don't want to
work on making a better relationship and
you want a better relationship, it might
not be a match. Like that conversation
has got to be had because working on a
relationship on your own is actually an
incredibly effective important thing to
do as far as your own personal growth,
but it's not going to make the
relationship better unless both people
want a better relationship. Meaning that
you can work on how you want to be with
them, how you want to listen, how you
want to fight, all the things that you
can do. And then the next relationship
you're going to be in, you're going to
be better at that next relationship.
But what's not going to happen is like
if one person's like resistant to having
a better relationship, you can't change
another human being that way. Like they
have to want it. You can, you know, try
for a while say this is how I want to
show up and they might be inspired and
join you. But eventually, like you have
to let them be them and you be you. And
if there's not that, hey, let's work on
this relationship together, then you've
got to make a choice. Do I want to stay
in a relationship that is like this?
because they don't want to make it any
better. They don't want to iterate. They
don't want to try. So, as a matter of
fact, when I say to people, they're
like, "Oh, should I get married to a
person?" One of the things that I'll ask
is like, "Are you both willing to work
and
change, you know, yourselves and and the
relationship so that it gets better and
better and better?" Because if you don't
have that agreement up
front, you know, the chances of success
are not great.
So the most important thing is that you
think you can do it and that the two of
you are in agreement about how to move
forward and the experiments and setting
up those experiments in advance so that
you can't fail. So it's just we've tried
that that didn't work for us cuz we're
these kinds of two people. So we're
going to try this other thing and then
you go through this list of experiments
and I guarantee you by the time the list
of experiments is done you will
absolutely be in a different place than
when it started. They don't have to work
even, but you will have learned about
yourself. You will have learned about
each other. You will learn things where
you can create new experiments that will
work. And it's just like one over the
other. And if you're really interested
in experiments, we have a whole bunch of
stuff on experiments that you can like
figure out how to do great experiments.
And there's a podcast and stuff you can
listen to.
There was a time in our relationship,
Tara and I, where I very much thought
that I
was superior. If you feel like you're
better than somebody when you're
fighting with them, it makes it
incredibly hard for that fight to be a
constructive, productive fight. I found
out that this is actually really, really
common when I started coaching in
relationships. And it's not just common,
there's a very particular pattern that
it's usually common with. So typically
in relationships, one person is more
intellectual and one person is more
emotional, right? So you probably know
which one you are like by the look on
your face, right? And so the person
who's intellectual often feels like
they're right more of the time and the
person who's emotional often feels like
they're wrong more of the time. This is
the dynamic. Now, the reason that people
feel like they're right, that they need
to feel superior and they can judge
other people, is because there's
emotions that they don't want to feel.
Whenever we're judging anybody,
including ourselves, it's because we
don't want to feel a certain emotion.
And
so, that makes the fight detrimental
because basically we're trying to
control the other person so that we
don't have to feel a certain emotion,
right? And so, controlling somebody else
is you doesn't make fights productive.
So the dynamic is one person's
emotional, one person's more logical.
The logical person feels like they're
right more of the time. The emotional
person often feels like they're wrong,
but there's a little part of them that's
like, "No, I'm not." Like that's also
see. And and so that's like the that's
like the typical dynamic. And then
people will agree on this relationship
dynamic for an extended period of time.
Sometimes a whole marriage. They're the
smart one, they're the right one, I'm
the emotional one. But the reason that
we're like attracted to one another is
because we're there to learn. I learned
really about my emotions through being
with Tara. And that was the like one of
the biggest blessings of our
relationship. And for Tara, there was a
learning of how to be in her emotions
and have that emotional fluidity without
being completely controlled by them and
not and feel taken away by them. And
that was the learning, one of the big
learnings for her in the relationship.
And so we're often attracted to that
person because that's the thing that
we're there to learn. But if we're
fighting and we're thinking, "Oh, we're
better than the other person." What
that's actually doing is we're not
feeling an emotion, which means we're
trying to control the other person, not
to feel emotion, trying to control
somebody. Well, that doesn't make for a
good fight. Nobody wants to be
controlled. Nobody's like,
"Hey, could you control me like in a way
that I'm not okay with?" You know,
there's
obviously we there's there's a whole
bunch of EDSM stuff that it says, hey,
yeah, control is, but we don't want to
be controlled in a way that we're
actually going against our will. We want
to have maybe some play there, but it's
not something that anybody signs up for.
And so, and so that doesn't make it
productive. It's not there for the
growth. And so, that's one of the
reasons. The other thing that's
happening is that the way the conflict
works, the way the fight works is that
it's there to show us what we're
missing. And often what we're missing is
something that's been hidden to us,
hidden from us through the trauma. And
so if we don't feel the emotions, then
we're not actually healing the trauma.
And so the fight doesn't get to the next
level.
So, it's really important if you're
noticing when you're in a fight, oh, I
am thinking I'm better than the other
person. The question is, what am I not
feeling? What do I need to feel right
now? And by feeling that emotion, that's
how you make the fight really
productive. There's this thing and
you'll notice it. You're like, "Oh, I'm
avoiding it during the fight." Like I
Yeah. And you kind of can see it out of
the corner of your eye. And maybe you
have that like thought, you know, the
one where it's like, "Oh, maybe."
It's like that's the thing when you're
in the fight. That's where you want to
go because that's where your healing is
going to be. That's where the
productivity is going to be. That's
where you're both going to be able to
find a solution that you couldn't see
before. And without that, you're never
going to get there. And and by putting
yourself above the other
person, it just completely cuts off that
possibility. you know, outside of the
fight, there's a lot of benefit to not
like putting yourself above somebody
else. Um, I think to me, when I used to
do that, the thing I couldn't see when I
was putting myself above people, Terra,
anybody was that I was creating
separation. Like, it prevented me from
actually being seen. It prevented me
from having the connection that I
wanted. It prevented me from feeling
being in full contact with life, being
in full contact with Terra. It was
basically a protective move. And
whenever we do anything that's
protective, like thinking that we're
better than somebody else, we're also
pushing them away. We're saying, so even
if we are saying, "Hey, I want you,"
we're also pushing away at the same
time. And and when we do that, we never
actually feel fulfilled. We never like
you don't can't think of anybody who's
walking around going I'm better than
everybody and and I I feel deeply
fulfilled. It just doesn't it doesn't
happen. There's always with with the I'm
feeling better than you. There is always
an underlying shame of I'm not good
enough. They go hand in hand. And you
can work on I'm not good enough, but you
can also work on the I'm better. And
both of them they balance each other
out. So when you get to the place of not
thinking like oh I'm better than
everybody or anybody or a person as that
happens the shame also erodess at the
same
pace. Tara and I were in a therapist's
office like earlier in our relationship.
And the therapist tells us the story
about how one of his clients wakes up in
the middle of the night, goes to the
bathroom and starts to pee and misses
the toilet and notice that his head
says, "Fuck, she must have moved the
toilet."
Like, and it's funny because we have all
done something like that where we're
like, we've we've entrained ourselves in
a relationship, but if something doesn't
feel right, something goes wrong, the
other person must be
responsible. And so, that's how
corrosive blame is in a relationship.
And so, there's this great saying that I
love, which is at the beginning of the
path, you blame somebody else. In the
middle of the path, you blame yourself.
And at the end of the path, you don't
blame
anybody. And and that's a really
critical part because usually what
happens is if somebody stops blaming
somebody else in a relationship, then
they start blaming themselves. Or if
they're blaming themselves, they're not
blaming the other person. And all of
that is just as corrosive. Blaming you
or blaming me in a relationship, both of
those things are corrosive. So the
reason that blame doesn't work is
because it's not true.
like blame is not true. It's like the
same concept of trying to figure out
like what's exactly fair in a marriage.
There's just no way to find it. So, am I
going to blame you or am I going to
blame your parents because of the way
they raised you or am I going to blame
your grandparents because of the way
that they raised your parents? Am I
going to blame the blood sugar that you
have? Is it is it the way that like your
day went at work? Like, what am I
blaming? Is it your boss's fault? Who am
I blaming for this thing? Right? So
there's this idea that we have that if
we find blame then we don't have to be
responsible. That's the logical side.
But what's actually happening there is
what we're saying is we don't want to
feel the shame. So if I blame you, I
cannot feel the shame. But that never
works in a relationship. And that's why
blame is corrosive. So I blame you, but
I I will feel even a little bit of shame
for blaming you. We never we never walk
away from blaming somebody and go, I
feel great. It's their fault, right?
Like we're not Yeah, we're good. It's
like it doesn't have it's like see it's
your fault. But look at me. I don't
[__] I'm not happy. That that hasn't
like relieved me of the shame. So that's
why the blame doesn't work is
because like it doesn't actually make
you feel like you want to fix anything
if I blamed you. It's like that's not
motivating, right? Hey, you're the one
to blame. You're right. I'm I'm [__]
up. It's not like, "Oh, wow. Yeah, we
could fix this thing. Let's do that
together." Or, "Yeah, I could fix this
thing and I'll be happier." No, it's
it's I'm I'm bad. So, if I blame you, I
don't feel better and I haven't
motivated you to fix anything. So, like,
what does it do? All it does is it just
passes shame back and forth. Moreover,
if I go and blame you, if I'm like,
"Okay, and you're wrong." and you accept
it, eventually you're going to be tired
of being wrong all the time. You're
you're going to be like, I don't want to
[__] be wrong all the time. And so,
either you're going to be passive
aggressive and start attacking me under
the table or you're going to like throw
that shame back at me
eventually and and then I'm going to be
blamed and and on and on it goes. It's
like you've never seen someone say, "You
know what? We got in this massive fight.
I blamed the other person enough and now
it's all resolved. Like that [__] has
like never happened. So blame is just it
doesn't work. But there's something in
our mind that says, "Yeah, but
somebody's wrong." And I question that.
I I I question that. Like if you need
somebody to be wrong in a relationship,
so then you're you're married to or
dating somebody who's
wrong. Like is that a turn on? No. But
we're just all humans and we're all
doing things and sometimes what we do is
a match. Sometimes what we do is not a
match. And everything is a symptom of
something else. So we often are told
like they were like the most the worst
case scenario. Let's just take the worst
case scenario which is she cheated on
me. Like that's an easy one. I blame you
for cheating on but yeah the
relationship was cold almost guaranteed
before the cheating happened or she
compulsively cheats because of daddy
issues and I and I got involved in that
for some reason some way I was attracted
into that relationship and so like well
is it really her fault? What was what
was I accepting from the beginning? How
did I remove my love so that she needed
to go to somebody else? Right? And if I
do find out everything that's wrong with
the other person, then I haven't fixed
myself, right? Which means I'm still
going to be attracted to the next woman
who's going
to, right? I have to look at what my
respon role and responsibility in it.
And if I'm blaming someone else, I can't
do that. If I'm blaming myself, I can't
do that either. Because if I'm blaming
myself that I'm being hard on myself and
I can't objectively look at it in a
shamefree way where I want to actually
improve it. So if I'm in a relationship
and I'm saying I screwed up, I did it
wrong that like this is all my fault in
this relationship. One thing I'm doing
is I'm abdicating any kind of
accountability for the other person. So
that's going to be like I'm basically
telling them they're weak, they're not
accountable, they're I'm better than
them because I'm responsible for
everything and they're just like along
for the ride as if they're not like they
don't have agency. They're not their own
human being. That's the that's
demeaning. But the other thing that's
happening is that I am just doing that
so I don't have to feel something
underneath. So I don't actually have to
feel the thing that's underneath the
blame, which is where my healing
happens.
My healing doesn't happen by saying,
"I'm bad. I'm [__] up. I need to
improve." Because I can tell you, every
addict out there right now who knows
they're an addict is telling themselves
that, and it's not changing
[__] I know that you right now, if I
said to you, tell me about the five
things that you wanted to have changed
in the last decade that haven't changed.
Every single one of those things would
be [__] that you shame yourself for,
that you blame yourself for, that you
say you're bad for. So, it doesn't heal
anything because it prevents you from
feeling the emotion underneath, which is
that feeling that you have to feel and
move through to get through the trauma.
That's why blame is just corrosive as
hell to a relationship. And it's blaming
you, blaming the other person. That's
all has to be let go. And the way to let
that blame go is just like it's a it's
just really simple is to see that it
it's not
real. It's like they're at fault or is
it their parents that are at fault or is
it their grandparents or is it society
or is it societal norms or is is it
Beyonce who taught you that you needed
to have a ring on it? Like who the [__]
is to blame for this thing? Like it
doesn't it doesn't resolve anything. The
question is how are you going to move
forward? The question is focusing how do
we want to be together? What's our
shared
vision? Blame it's an elusive. It's like
perfection. It's different for [__]
everybody. Anybody can have their point
of view. The question is, are we able to
be together? How do we want to be
together? How do we want to love each
other? And how do we get there? That
moves you forward. looking in the past
and seeing who the [__] was
wrong. Just
corrosive. Typically, what happens in a
fight is that we're passing shame back
and
forth. No, I'm not bad, you're bad. No,
I'm not bad. You're bad. Right? And so,
the first thing that that requires is
for you to think that somebody's bad.
Right? If you can get over the idea that
somebody's bad, anybody's bad, then the
fight just falls apart. But the other
thing that can also make that fight just
fall apart is the idea that you don't
have to defend
yourself. Because the way the fight
typically works
is I feel attacked, so I'm going to
defend myself. My defense makes you feel
attacked, so I'm going to defend myself.
This defense makes you feel attacked,
and so you have to defend yourself. And
back and forth it goes. So it's like,
you know, no, that's not what I said.
You said
this, right? That's not what I said. Or
I said that because, you know, I said
that you were ugly only because you
asked me like how ugly am I? So I was
like, well, you're about this ugly. So I
had no choice, right? And so so I'm
sitting there saying like I'm not wrong.
like understand me, see me, but you're
hearing, wait, you just called me ugly
again, right? Like, and so it's like
this back and forth thing that happens
where and you listen to yourself in the
next fight that you have and just go,
"Oh, wait." And can what I'm saying that
defends that I think is defending myself
be seen as an
attack? Because that's what I see in in
couples that are fighting all the time.
Each of them wants to be
seen and in their attempt to be seen,
they're defending
themselves and that defense seems like
an attack to the other person. And so
both people feel like they're defending
themselves and both people feel
attacked. And so you can either stop
seeing that there's someone wrong, so
there's no shame to go back and forth in
this shame hot potato, or you can
realize, oh, there's nothing to defend.
If you can drop that experience right
now just for a short period of time and
says I don't need to be seen at this
moment. I can be seen in an
hour but in this moment I don't need to
be seen. I don't need to defend
anything. I can just actually listen and
find out what their reality
is and see that truth. Allow that truth
to be there. Not as like the ultimate
truth but just as a truth of right this
is where they are. I can hear them. I
can understand them.
when they feel heard, then oftent times
they're at that point wanting to see
you. And so that's when you don't need
to let like if you hold on tightly to
trying to be seen, you're going to push
being seen away. And so that's how that
fight works. Almost every fight and it
doesn't even matter if this is a fight
between a man and a a wife or like NATO
and Russia, right? Like it's like it
happens like both people feel like
they're defending themselves on some
level. for some reason and both people
feel the other person's defense is an
attack and it just goes back and forth.
There's also this secondary benefit of
not needing to be
seen. It's because what it requires is
you to actually see
yourself. So in a
fight, if you see yourself as bad or you
see the fact that you could be bad, then
there's always going to be something to
defend.
So the more that you learn not to defend
yourself, the more you can start to
notice your inherent goodness, you start
to become immune to shame because when
you see people shame you, it's like, oh,
you can just see they don't want to feel
bad about themselves or don't want to
feel out of
control. And so if somebody else can't
see you and you recognize that like
they're not capable of seeing me right
now, the only option for you to get to
peace is to see
yourself. Oh yeah, here I am. and I
actually love this person and I'm not
trying to hurt
anybody and I I can listen to them and I
want to be here with them and I'm I'm
not going to take abuse. I'm going to
draw my boundaries. Whatever it is, but
you can just see that inherent goodness
in you in
yourself. But as long as you're
defending yourself, you you can't see
it. Nobody walks away from a fight
feeling like, "Oh, wow. I feel great
about myself."
But if a fight starts and you go, "Oh,
I've done nothing wrong." And you can
see yourself clearly and listen to the
other person. You actually walk away
feeling
great being in a
fight. So, I think Tara and I hadn't
quite gotten married yet. I remember
going over to her parents house. It was
like a crazy ass yell fest. It was like
out of control. I was like, "Oh, like
apparently her family is like mine." It
was just yelling a lot. When Tara and I
got married, we just followed the
pattern. And we had this great therapist
who I am forever thankful for, one of I
would say one of my greatest teachers.
And she said, you know, she's like,
"You're you're emotionally abusing each
other." Both Ter and I were like, "No,
we're not. We're just
yelling, you know, this is just
yelling." I remember it's like, "No,
we're not like Uhuh." Like, "No, that's
not that's not abuse." like abuse is
something like when you're whacking
somebody on the head with a like a cast
iron skillet or something and she's like
no I want you to read the stuff and you
know she talked to us but her definition
which has stuck with me forever is
emotional abuse is when you are using
your emotion to try to control somebody.
Now the one that our society says is the
worst is anger, right? Yelling at me so
that I do the thing so that like you
know and the abusive person who's
yelling or screaming or even hitting
like that aggressive thing that's what
we say is bad. But it's just as true
using guilt to try to control somebody
as emotional abuse or using your
sadness. Look how hurt I am. See how bad
you are. or using your fear
like like take care of me. Take take all
my fear for me. Anytime when you're
putting the emotion at the person and
you want to control them and try to have
them take care of you or do what you
want, bend them to your will through
your emotions, that's that's abuse. And
so that's one of the things that in a
fight you absolutely can't do in a way
that makes the fight productive. Now,
you can do it. You can go out of the
room and you can yell and you can scream
and you can get sad and guilty and it
doesn't matter. Like you can get angry
and and sad and scared in a fight too.
That's all fine. It just can't be at the
other person. It can't be trying to
control them and it can't make them feel
unsafe. And if it doesn't do any of that
fine, great. All the emotions are fine.
We love emotions. But if you're using it
to control somebody or if they feel
controlled by the
emotion, then it becomes incredibly
unproductive because it's abuse. It's
like yelling at one another or it's like
guilting one another. It's basically
saying, "I am going to control you. I'm
going to oppress you with this emotion."
Now, people have different ways of doing
it. And like one of my favorite that is
like very like not seen almost at all is
the person who's like the weak person
who's like, "Oh, you said something
critical to me and now I'm broken down
and I'm sad and I'm not going to get up
for two weeks and I can't love you
anymore and I'm being I'm being big
about it." But this can happen in very
small ways. That's just as much
emotional abuse as someone yelling at
someone as a way to scare them to get
them to change. So, it's really
important that in a fight, when you're
having a fight with somebody, that
you're not using your emotions to
control them. In fact, that you're not
trying to control them in any way. That
you're trying to see them. That you are
trying to understand where they are.
You're trying to allow yourself to be
seen when they're ready to see you. That
you are finding a way that both of you
can come together and have a solution
that works for both of you, not control.
Because the thing is like if you control
somebody to do something eventually that
breaks. There's this um way that we
talked about venture capital which I
always loved which is you have to make a
lot of deals in venture capital big
deals and small deals. And we would say
the amount of energy it took to make the
deal is the amount of energy you have to
use to maintain
it. So if a deal kind of happened like
gently and like it all happened and fell
into place, those deals usually went
really really well. If it was a deal
where it was like there was big
struggles and you had to negotiate this
thing and you didn't quite see eye to
eye and everything was a little you're
shoving it into place, you have to
maintain that to make that deal
successful. And it's it wasn't 100%
true, but it was true a lot. Similarly,
if you have to control and control and
like push somebody into doing something
so that you can be happy, you're going
to have to maintain that pressure to
keep them in that spot. It doesn't
freaking work.
finding what their truth is, finding
where they want to move, and finding how
that aligns with you. That's a much
easier way to get to a place where
you're together and at peace. And so, it
doesn't even work to try to control
anybody for any kind of length of time.
And it's why you see relationships where
somebody dominates through control.
Those aren't happy relationships.
Whether it's controlling through big
emotion sadness or big emotion anger or
by withholding love, all of that, none
of it leads to a happy relationship and
just never
works. One of the biggest tricks for
fighting well is just making some
agreements before you fight. And that
doesn't mean like, oh, we're about to
get in a fight now. Let me how are we
going to do this? That doesn't work
because by the time you're getting in a
fight, your nervous system is already
riled. So, this is about
like sometime when you're not fighting,
sit down and say, "How do we want to
fight together?" And I remember Tara and
I one day we were I think we had I think
we were seeing some friends in Colorado
and they got in a fight and it they they
gave us a couple examples. The first one
was they didn't hide their fight from
us. They weren't going to go into the
shame. They weren't going to say
fighting was shameful and they could do
that because they weren't abusing each
other, right? They weren't trying to
control each other. They were just
having a conflict. And so that was like
quite a lovely thing to see in itself.
But the secondary thing was at some
point in the fight somebody
said, what was it exactly? It was like
somebody said, uh, oh yeah, hey, we
agreed not to do that. We we agreed not
to use that word. And the other one was
like, oh yeah, sorry. And then they
continued with the conflict. And I was
like, "What the what the T and I looked
at each other like, what the [__] just
said?" Like, "That's not how that's not
how you fight." And so we asked them
about it after their fight ended, which
was like in a relatively short period of
time. And I said,
"Uh, what what the hell? What the hell
was that?" And like, "Oh, we have an
agreement. We have our agreements on how
we fight." And they literally had a
piece of paper, which Tan and I never
have done. And that it would probably be
a good idea to have a like have them
written down cuz I think we forget them
often. They said even at one point and
then Tara and I experimented with this.
They said at one point our agreement was
that whenever we got in a fight we get
naked. So like if we're going to fight
we're going to be completely unclothed
and be completely vulnerable. And they
said it totally changed the way they
fought. And it changed the way Tara and
I fought too. And we we don't do it to
this day. They stopped doing it. But
like you can literally have agreements
of like the words that you're not going
to say and you're not going to make
threats. You're not going to threaten
divorce. You're and to have those
agreements. And the thing that I'll say
about it is that if you do that, don't
expect to live up to all of the
agreements on your first fight, right?
And but also don't make it an excuse not
to. It's our first fight so I haven't.
you really want to try to maintain the
agreements and you don't want to have a
fight over the fact that you didn't
maintain the agreements. So, it's really
important to be able to say that's not
our agreement and be able to stop and
say, "Okay, yeah, that's true. We agreed
to this." And it's also important that
those agreements are actually something
that are creative and make you both feel
good and that you both actually agree
to. So, it's not like a cajoling like,
"Okay, so this is how we're going to
fight, right? Good." Like it's literally
like
oh when you do this I can say this and
so Tara and I have a many of those
things like so for instance if I feel
like in a rush and that's creating
conflict she knows like our rules are
she just says I see how much you
care and it totally just makes me go
soft because I'm in a rush because of
the way that I was raised not because of
what the [__] is going on right now
right it's my trauma it's not the real
thing and she knows that that one thing
that she's just acknowledging my care
can totally disintegrate that rush for
me and disintegrate my like urge to try
to control her to speed up. So it can be
many kinds of agreements like sentences
that you say when somebody is in their
trauma or the agreement of if somebody
says hey I'm in my trauma then you go
over and you just touch them or when
somebody's sad one of our agreements is
like when somebody's crying we don't try
to stop them we don't try to fix it we
just be with them in their
tears you know or if somebody's angry
and you need and you feel like it's
abuse you say hey I need that to stop
can you please go into a different room
and then you go into a different room
and get angry and come back. Like
there's all sorts of agreements you can
have and they have to be yours. They
have to be something not prescribed by
me, but something that you and your
partner sit down with and say, "How do
we want to fight? How do we want to be
with each other?" And your first set of
agreements are not going to be great.
They're you're going to learn some [__]
and you're going to have another set of
agreements. You're going to have so to
to go back to that set of agreements
over and over again and say, "This is
how we want to fight together. This is
how we want to have our conflict because
we're speaking our truth, because we're
growing, because we're changing as human
beings. We're going to have these fights
and this is how we want to do it so that
they're most productive, so that we can
get to growth quicker, so that we can
love each other better. These are our
agreements. And it's just so good to
have them.
You're not alone in this idea that when
you pull away from the fight that the
your partner is like can't have it, you
know, chases you or doesn't allow it to
happen or like completely falls apart.
As a matter of fact, like in the
relationship with Tara, especially at
the beginning, that was the case for me.
Every time she was like, "Oh, I just
need a moment for this to take a break."
I would like my whole system would like
freak the [__] out. I'd be like, "What
the hell is going on here and I would
lose I would totally lose myself and and
I didn't understand it." So, the reason
that this works is because one person is
usually like the chaser and one person
is usually like
the okay like and they kind of they
they're more like the love remover,
right? Right? So one's like chasing the
love and one's like removing the love
typically. So for the person who's the
chaser, it is like death, internal death
to like be
abandoned. And so oftent times the
person who's the abandoner, it's like
death to be chased. Like oh just like
give me a [__] break, give me a
moment. Like leave me alone for a
second. I need to find myself. And so
both of them feel that way. they feel
like like a little bit of death for the
person, especially if it's like a big
trauma in their life. No matter what
you're doing, when you're leaving a
fight, it's really important to do it in
connection. So, when you're leaving a
fight to say, "Hey, I need a break. I
want to start again in 10 minutes is
really and it's a precise time like,
"Hey, I'm not leaving you. I'm just
taking a minute for myself. I'm going to
come back in 10 minutes and we're going
to continue the
conversation is a huge thing as compared
to well fine [__] it I'm going to bed
right that's a very different thing than
saying hey I want to resolve this and I
need a moment right because that one
feels like the removal of love and one
feels like oh they just need some space
and they can come back so how you leave
a fight is incredibly important because
what you need is to feel like hey we're
still connected
we're just having some conflict. That's
the most productive way to leave a
fight. If you need to calm your nervous
system, if you need to just have a
moment to think for yourself, whatever
it is, or just you notice that you're
about to get angry at somebody and you
don't want to get angry at them because
you don't want to control them. So, you
need to go out of the room for a moment.
And so, the important piece is like how
that fight is left. I remember in this
time where I was the angry person in the
relationship with Terra, but I was the
aggressively angry person. She was the
passively angry person, right?
Everybody's angry. And every time I
would yell, she'd be like, I'm out of
here. And it was like this death for me.
And when we started to learn like, hey,
I I want to pull out of my anger at so
this actually gives me a break to to get
composed. and she would be able to say,
"Hey, I'll be back in 10 minutes. I'm
right here with
you." All of a sudden, these breaks
became like really great ways to have a
fight. It It wasn't a death anymore. And
she could do it with an open heart. And
it was like, "Hey, I'm okay with you
being angry. I just don't want you to be
angry at me. I just need a break so that
I can be in myself. I'll be back in five
minutes." All of a sudden, our fights
completely changed.
is all of a sudden there was just so
much more safety for everybody. She
could feel safe because she didn't have
to feel like she was being yelled at. I
could feel safe because I didn't wasn't
going to get abandoned. And that like
level of safety and trust allowed for
the conflict to just be so much more
civil, so much more loving, so much more
openhearted, and yet still have the
conflict that we needed so that we could
take our relationship to the next level.
So Tara and I used to live partially in
the city and partially in these 200
acres. And there was this moment where
she's sitting in her Miata revving her
engine threatening to run me over and I
am sitting above with a pitchfork, which
was the closest thing, threatening to
hit the hood of her car. Like that's how
bad our fights got at the beginning.
And oh, it was just it was brutal. I I
never physically hit her, right? But and
she never physically hit me, but
the but it was it like those fights were
brutal.
And something that we realiz is that
there's certain things in fighting, I
think everybody knows this, but I I
think it's important to say it, which is
there's certain things in fighting
that take a long time to heal. If you if
you do in a fight, it's going to take a
long time to heal. The threat of any
kind of physical violence is is going to
take a long time to heal. Any kind of
physical violence, like the nervous
system, our nervous system, even if our
minds say, "Oh, I know that they were
just," our nervous system is like, "Oh,
that's real." And we're going to we're
like, we're going to be like this around
them every time they get angry and then
their anger can't be okay and then we
can't heal through that anger.
yelling um insults is another like
insulting somebody that can have the
same kind of big emotional like hit and
that it erodess trust over a long period
of time generally threatening somebody
with future stuff. I'm going to divorce
you. I'm going to cheat on you. Any of
those big threats are going to be
incredibly damaging and it's going to
take a long time to heal out of those.
And so the thing about a fight is if you
go past a certain
limit, it's going to actually be
traumatizing instead of healing the
trauma. So you can have a disagreement
that heals the trauma. You can have a
disagreement that
ret-raumatizes. and those fights, if
you're threatening, if you're any kind
of physical violence, if you're um
making threats in the future, if you are
insulting, anything like that, you're
going to be
ret-raumatizing. And so holding the
boundary of saying like, "We're not
doing that in a fight or if you're doing
that, I'm going to leave. I'll be back
in 20 minutes or I'll be back when you
call me and tell me you're ready to do
this without threatening me, without
insulting me." holding that boundary is
incredibly important or you're going to
start going in the wrong direction. It's
going to get ret-raumatizing instead of
healing of the trauma that the fight is
eliciting in you. And so that's that's
like a critical piece. And when Taran
and I made those agreements, and we
talked about agreements, and I highly
recommend putting these things in the
agreements, that was like the first and
most important step in turning our
fights into something that became
healing, that became evolutionary for
us, that became transformative, that
helped us become better people, is just
like making it a safe playing field. And
so that is absolutely critical.
Boundaries for me was always something
that was scary. It was something that
like I was intruding on somebody,
telling somebody else what to do, and I
was like controlling somebody. That's
what boundaries were subconsciously in
my head. And I realized at that moment,
no, no,
boundaries
are are are an act of love. and and they
are an act of taking care of yourself
and they're not telling other people
what to do. And fighting requires great
boundaries. You have to have great
boundaries to have good productive
fights. And so the rules that I have
with boundary are easy. There's two of
them. One of them is as soon as you draw
the boundary, no matter what the
response is, it needs to make you feel
more love for the other person. So
boundaries aren't like a defensive no.
It's going to open my heart. It's going
to allow me to feel more free. It's
going to it's going to actually
acknowledge my
freedom and I can love you better. And
the second thing is going to be is it's
going to not tell the other person what
they need to do. It's going to be
telling them what you're going to do
under certain circumstances. It's when
you do X, I'm going to do Y. And the why
isn't going to be I am going to do
something that hurts you. It's it is or
I'm going to do something that controls
you. It's I am going to go and take care
of myself. So when you're guilt tripping
me, I'm going to leave. I'll be back in
20 minutes. Or if you're guilt tripping
me, I'm going to leave. And as soon as
you call me and tell me that we can have
a conversation without guilt, I'm happy
to come back.
And so if you follow those two
rules, it makes your heart open no
matter what their response is going to
be. And this that's an important part is
no matter what their response is going
to be. Because what happens when you
draw a boundary is you go, I'm going to
draw this boundary and you get scared of
the of the response. Because if you have
to draw a boundary as a new thing, if
it's a new boundary that you're
drawing, it's automatically true that
you do not feel okay drawing the
boundary. You think that maybe you
shouldn't draw this boundary. Like maybe
you should just put up with it. Maybe
you should put up with the gaslighting.
Maybe you should put up with the guilt.
I can't say no to my mom guilt tripping
me. I can't say no to my mom
criticizing. I can't say no to somebody
yelling at me. And so you're going to if
you're going to draw the boundary,
you're going to get really defensive.
You're going to be like ready for the
fight, which invites the fight. Like if
I draw a boundary with you and I'm like
if you get angry at me, I'm going to
leave. that is going to invite a fight
where it's like I'm not I don't want to
be with your anger, so I'm happy to
leave when you get angry and I'm happy
to come back as soon as you're ready to
have the conversation without yelling at
me. So, it's going to be a whole
different interaction if you can draw it
with that open heart. So, it's really
critical that whatever boundary you
draw, it opens your heart and that
you're not telling the other person what
to do because then you're in a control
game with them and instead you're
saying, "This is what I'm going to do
because I have agency. I have my own
empowerment and I can do I'm free. I can
do the thing that I want to do." And so,
that's the critical piece of the
boundary. as far as that other piece
that I think is really important is that
the boundary drawing isn't really for
the other
person. It's for you. So, for instance,
you're at a job
and you have to say to your boss like,
"No, you don't yell at me, but there's
somebody else that the boss never yells
at." It's like, what what's going on
there? Why is it that the thing that the
boss does to you, they're not doing to
everybody? It's because in that person's
mind, it's very clear that like, no, I'm
not going to get yelled at by the boss.
Maybe the boss yelled at them one point
and said, "Hey, hey, don't do that." Or
maybe the boss yelled at him at one
point and they were like, "Wow, looks
like you're feeling way out of control
on this one." And the boss was like,
"Oh." But the boss is yelling at you
because there's something in you that
thinks it's okay. Cuz as soon as you
know like, "Oh, I'm not going to put up
with that kind of behavior," then
there's nothing in you that has to like
fight or defend. and it's less likely
for that behavior to come at you. So the
boundary is mostly about you learning
for yourself that something's not okay.
And you're drawing it
externally is learning that in a real
concrete way. It's like learning how to
like fix an engine. You need to get your
hands dirty. Learning how to draw
boundaries. And what's actually the
right boundary for you? You're going to
have to get your hands dirty. And so
it's really important to see boundaries
not really even about them. It's really
all about you learning what what works
for you and being okay, saying like,
"Hey, I am okay. If you need to pull
your love away from me because I'm going
to take care of myself, then that that's
what's going to need to be the case."
And that opens up your life to people
who are ready to treat you in the way
that you actually want to be
treated.
Our oldest daughter was raised in such a
way where we always allowed her to have
her emotions, but somewhere she was like
17 years old. I was having an off day
and she was having a hard time and she
was like going through it and I was like
trying to give her advice to like make
her feel better and she was like, "Dad,
just let me have my emotions." I was
like, "Oh, fuck."
And I realized
like that is the cause of so much
tension in almost every relationship
that I see is that especially not every
relationship as far as like business
relationships but in every relationship
as far as lovers
relationship. And usually what happens
is somebody feels like they're
responsible for the other person's
emotions. And that could be as simple as
like I'm trying to make her happy and
she's not happy. And it could be I'm
trying to make sure he doesn't get
mad and he's mad. It's like we're not
emotionally responsible for one another.
We can't be. And everybody says whenever
I say that they say to
me, but I can make her happy. Like I
brought her flowers and she became
happy. And it's like yeah, but the next
day would would she be happy if you
brought her flowers every day? Can you
like consistently make her happy like
that? So, I'm not saying like don't care
for the person. Don't do things that
like feel good to you and allow them to
feel good if that's where they're at.
But if you're trying
to do things to make them feel certain
things, that's like manipulative. That's
not that's not love. That's right. It's
like, oh, I want to give something to
you like flowers because I thought of
you and I think it's a wonderful thing
and it's great. But it's like if I'm
trying to constantly make you happy and
chase your happiness or chase making
sure that you're not scared or chase
making sure that you're not angry or
that is just nothing but a disaster for
relationships. And and the way that it
works is I am going to try to make sure
that you don't get angry, which
means I'm showing you that I'm scared of
your anger, which means you feel more
alone, which means you're going to get
angry at me because every time you feel
really alone, you get angry. or it means
I am going to um try to make sure that
you don't feel scared and then you're
going to like it for a little while
maybe then and then it's going to feel
like I'm caretaking you like I'm
treating you like a little kid because
like oh you need to be taken care of
like oh it's going to be okay like and
then all of a sudden you're resentful
all the time because you're saying wait
I can [__] take care of myself or
let's say you try to make me happy all
the time and then I start going, oh,
like you need me to be happy and then I
remove my love, which makes you feel
like you've failed, which makes you
chase me some more. So, it's so critical
in a relationship to just allow the
other person to have their
emotions, right? Do things that are
kind, be compassionate, be gentle, be
loving, all that good stuff, but be
yourself and allow the chips to fall
where they may. Let the person be angry.
Let the person be scared. Let the person
be sad. Let the person be happy. Let the
person be excited. So, what I've noticed
is every emotion that I have a hard
time sitting with with Tara or with my
kids is an emotion that I wasn't allowed
to sit with as a kid that I don't like
sitting with. So, what I found out is
what I'm actually doing is I am trying
to make them feel a certain way so I
don't have to feel a certain way. It's
it's even more manipulative than I
thought it was. I thought it was at the
beginning like I'm trying to help this
person and then it was, oh, I am trying
to make them feel good for me. So, so I
don't have to feel a certain way so I
can continue to be neurotic around my
emotions. And you can see this. You go
into an airplane and a kid starts to cry
and you stand up and you look at the
airplane and everybody who's freaking
frustrated, they were the ones that
weren't allowed to cry as kids. It's
just like is as simple as that. And so
it's also just deeply disempowering to
try to take somebody's emotion away from
them. There's this saying that says
never take uh the bottom away from an
addict. They need that bottom to get to
healing. It's very similar like never
take an emotion away from somebody.
That's how we learn. That's how we grow.
It's how we make
decisions. And and to take that away
from them is to ch make them into a
child. It breeds resentment in a
relationship. And then eventually it'll
just kill the sex in the relationship.
The reason it kills the sex is because
you want to have sex with equals. You
don't want to have sex with someone
you're caretaking. That's not how it's
meant to be between a um a romantic
couple. It's not a caretaking
relationship. it is a supportive
interdependent relationship. And so as
soon as that happens and the sex will
start to die as well. So it's really
important just allowing each other to
have the emotions, not try to fix it,
just be with
them. One of my daughters came home from
school and she was just ready for a
fight. It was like whatever I said she
was hearing as criticism.
whatever you know I would do. I'm like
here give me a hug. Oh, you're trying to
control me. It was like anything was
just like ready for a fight. And we had
realized like oh they just like need
this emotional release. So like
something overwhelmed them and we would
say okay and then we would draw some
boundary. No, I'm not going to stop
telling you that we got to do the
dishes. And they'll have this big
meltdown. They yell, scream, and then
they would be back in connection and
they'd be like, "Oh, actually what
happened at school today? I got made fun
of. Someone called me like the
red-headed goose or whatever and blah
blah blah. And I remember hanging out
with Tara one day and I just noticed
everything I said she contradicted. And
it was like more subtle obviously than
like an 8-year-old, but it was like
everything I said. I was like, "Oh yeah,
I this thing I Well, why did you do it
that way? That doesn't seem like" And
then I why did you do it was just like
one criticism after another, which is
very unlike Tara. And I would even like
I even tested it. I was like, "Oh, I'm
going to contradict myself and I'm going
to agree with her." And I did. I agreed
with her. And then she was like, "No,
why would you ever do that?" And and so
I was like, "Oh, this is the same thing.
She has this big pent up emotional
experience that she needs to get out and
this is the safe place. She knows that
if she's going to be angry here, she's
still going to get loved. Like I'm still
going to be here for her the next day.
This is the safe place to have that
emotional release." And then I started
realizing one day like I was doing the
same thing. I came home and I had a
shitty day and I was like, I'm
contradicting everything Terra says. I'm
like, I'm looking for that fight. And I
think almost all of us have been there
with somebody where we're like, oh, this
is like there like there's I'm not
getting out of this fight. Like, oh
[__] here it comes. There's like no way
for me to get out of the fight. So, what
what's happening there is really
important because what's happening is
that we have this big emotional
experience and we are looking for a way
to get it out and we're going for the
safe place. Like some people use sports
for that. For instance, I'm going to go
watch my sports team so I can get this
big emotion out. Similarly, some people
will do that in in a relationship. Not
everybody, but some people will do it in
the relationship. And it sounds like
that's what's happening in your
relationship. So, the important thing is
to realize, oh, I'm not feeling
internally connected with myself and I
am starting a fight to do
that. Or they are, oh, they're they're
not feeling connected. And so instead of
going to let's have a fight, go to what
do we need to be connected because the
fight can be very corrosive when it's
like that because it's not about the
other person. So now I'm yelling at you,
but it's really not about you at all.
Like that like how that that can't be
good. The fight isn't about the thing
that's in the relationship. It's about
the fact that your boss yelled at you or
something like that. And so to be able
to start recognizing, oh, this feeling,
this sensation, this sematic experience
that I'm having right now, that's how I
feel when I'm looking for a fight. And
what do I really need? What do I really
need? A cuddle? Do I really need to go
into another room and just [__] yell
for a while and then come back? You
don't have to yell at anybody to get the
emotional release, right? That's the
weird thing about humanity. I mean, I
remember this moment of like somebody's
like, "Oh, anger is good." And I'm like,
"How can anger be good?" I'm like, every
time I get angry, somebody gets hurt.
And they're like, well, why are you
getting angry at anybody, right? Like,
like somehow or another, our mind is
like, we have to repress our anger or we
have to get angry at somebody instead of
like just go into a room and get angry.
And I highly recommend in a like if you
see a fight where this is happening,
say, "Hey, let's just go and yell in
other rooms and then come back together
so that you don't have to actually have
this like false emotional outlet at
somebody to discover what the real thing
is happening for you. Instead, just go
and have the emotional outlet without
hurting each other. Get the yelling, get
the crying, get whatever needs to happen
that's
not at each other. and then come back
and then have the discussion, whatever
that discussion is. And it works
wonders. It's such an easy thing to do.
Say, "Oh, it looks like we want to get
in a fight. Let's just go yell and then
we'll come back." It's just a simple
thing. And then you're not getting
you're not taking your emotion out on
somebody else. You're just getting your
emotions out and then you're solving the
problem. It was amazing. Like one
paragraph, like 3 minutes of talking and
I was not getting it right every single
time. And basically it's this tool where
one person says something just like a
short thing to explain their side of the
fight and then you just repeat what you
heard. And I like got it
wrong every time. I was like what the is
happening. It's like I know I hear that
thing and like and I'm repeating it but
she's like no no that's not what I
meant. And she would adjust. No I meant
this. I'd be like okay. Then I would say
it and she'd be like yeah. And then
she'd do the next paragraph. I'm like
okay so you said this. She's like, "No,
no, no, no. I meant this." And it was
like little nuances of, "Oh, like I was
just putting the blame in this like odd
place in the corner or I was saying that
like I was inferring that she was trying
when it was something that she wasn't
trying or and it was an amazing moment
because I was like, "Oh, I don't I don't
really get what she's saying to me." So
like to some degree we were like
fighting over semantics, but it wasn't
it was a little bit more than semantics.
and the fact that it was her
perspective. I wasn't seeing the
perspective through the words. So, we
did this mirroring over and over again
for like I think it was like over a year
every time we fought just to like learn
what each other was saying and how much
of our disagreement was just not
understanding the other person, where
they were coming from, what they meant
when they said X, Y, and Z compared to
what you heard. And it was an amazing
thing. And so how to listen has become a
huge thing for me. And the most
important thing is to listen to a person
like they're right. Like I the way I do
it in a fight is I will listen to Tara
and I will think like she is everything
I admire like the best guru of the
biggest thing and she's like everything
that spills out of her mouth is a pearl
of wisdom. And I'll listen to her like
that like oh there's some truth here
that I don't get that I am here to
understand. And it doesn't mean I have
to buy it, but the idea is like I'm here
to fully open, fully to understand where
she's coming from. And the other thing
that I do when I'm listening is just be
full wonder. Just like in the connection
course when we talk about wonder, I'm
just like I don't it's like curiosity
without needing to know the answer. And
it's and it's this space of like awe.
Oh, wow. What is happening? I have no
idea. I'm so curious, but I don't need
to like find the I don't need to root
around and get to the place where we
solve everything. I just need to be in
wonder and eventually it'll show itself.
And so that's that's the way I do it. I
listen to her like she's like this
unbelievably intelligent, smart, amazing
person, which she is. And then and then
and then also listen to it like just
with this huge amount of wonder. But it
took me like like like a long time of
just mirroring her to understand that
how much I was not understanding of what
she meant. And it and it went both ways.
So she wasn't understanding me and we
just had different ways of looking at
the world and different ways of
communicating and our trauma filtered
things in different ways. And so it's
it's so critical to learn how to listen.
And I really suggest for you just doing
that mirroring for a while and until you
really understand like where you might
be missing stuff. And that the other
thing that that does which is really
cool is when you realize, oh, they mean
something different than what I'm
hearing and I'm putting my layers of
interpretation on it and they're putting
their layers of interpretation on it,
you start realizing like we might not be
disagreeing. Like this isn't personal.
Like this isn't them rejecting me. This
is them not understanding me, right?
This isn't like they think I'm bad. This
is they don't get where I'm coming from.
They like they just they can't
comprehend it. And it's really hard to
be mad at
ignorance. Not ignorance like you're
ignorant, but ignorance like not
understanding. It's really hard to be
mad at not understanding. Really easy to
be mad at you're attacking me.
And so there's a way in which all of a
sudden when you're listening like this,
when you start working on the on the
issue, there's this um woman I work with
who's amazing. She's this technologist
and she talks about she goes, "It's
like like looking at the problem like
it's a patient on the table. It's not
personal." Like we just look at it like,
"Oh, this is the problem." And then all
of a sudden that's what happens. You're
like, "Oh, we're just looking at this
problem like it's a patient on the
table. It's not personal. It doesn't
mean anybody's bad. We can just listen
to each other and like understand each
other and then everything's going to
resolve itself. So learning to listen
critical. So I remember this one time
with Tara. It was maybe like 4 years in
the relationship and she came home and
she was pissed at me. I mean, she was
she was doing some acting in LA and she
had a show and I didn't come to the show
and she came in and was just like
furious at me and I and in my mind I was
like,
"Oh, this is this is true for her." Like
this is how she sees the world. It
doesn't have to be mine. It's hers. And
so I could just be there and like have
an open heart and listen to her and hear
her
story and and with the recognition like
this is like important to her. This is
true for her. This is this is
real and I could just have this massive
amount of compassion. So I just
listened. I was just there and I was
just
understanding and I could say I'm sorry
and I said I was sorry and it just all
melted inside of like 10 minutes. What
used to be hours of fighting, you know,
like like maybe even a day of fighting
because what would happen is that she
would tell me her story and I would
think this has to be true or not true.
And if it was true then I did something
wrong.
And if it was not true, then she did
something wrong because she's yelling at
me, right? And so then I was in this
world where one of us had to do
something wrong. And the trick was, oh,
all I have to actually do is just see
that this is actually what's important
to her, that this is the way she sees
the world. And that's not wrong or
right. It's just that
truth that's hers. And so when I learned
that it like it changed everything and
then we both learned it and it just
changed everything in our relationship
because all of a sudden it wasn't about
trying to figure out like we weren't
adjudicating life anymore. There we used
to have this phrase and it was like hey
let's not go into the courtroom like
courtroom was like to figure out who
like who had done what and what the
truth was. It's like no there's just
like this is the way you see reality.
this is the way I see reality and how do
we want to see reality together? How how
do we want to be
together? Even if you continue to see it
this way and I continue to see it that
way, right? And so there was things in
our relationship that we would just
agree, oh, this is the way I see it.
This is the way you see it. But what we
never did was we never said, and because
we see it that way, then you have to be
this way or I have to be that way.
Because it was really important. What we
never really wanted to do was to
compromise in that way where we had to
be something besides ourselves to be
loved by one another. If you're looking
for like what the truth is instead of
trying to understand the other person's
truth and what their reality is, then
you miss each other. There's no
connection there. Nobody has ever said
once I find the truth of this
relationship then the relationship will
be happy. Like that's not how it works.
But everybody says, "I would love to be
seen. I would love to be understood. I
would love to be connected with as I
am." And so finding the truth doesn't
help the relationship. Finding the other
person's truth. Understanding it. It
doesn't mean you compromise yourself. It
doesn't mean that you change your
actions. It's just saying, "I understand
you. I get how that's the
case." And then they can immediately do
the same for you if they want to. And
what I notice is that when two people
are in a fight, this is such a critical
thing that two people in a fight, what
both want is to be seen. Both of them
want to feel seen. And what they're
usually doing is they're just throwing
shame at each other. They're like,
you're wrong. You're wrong. You're
wrong. You're wrong. You're wrong.
You're wrong. And what they're saying
is, "I want to be seen. I want to be
seen. I want to be seen." If you want to
end a fight, just sit down and see their
truth. Connect with where they're at. To
do that, you can't take the blame. And
the way you do that is to say, "This is
their story. I'm I'm here to understand
them. I'm not here to see if I'm wrong
or if they're wrong. I'm bad, they're
bad, the truth, and how we're going to
adjudicate the truth. It's just I want
to see them and fully understand where
they're at." That's the first step. And
as soon as someone feels seen, almost
immediately, they want to see the other
person. And so the fight just almost
instantaneously resolves.
So many of my fights with Tara was
because I was just not attuned to the
thing that she wanted in that moment.
And so and and vice versa. And so we
came up with this idea of like, hey, do
you right now you're processing
something. Do you just want to be
listened to? Do you want some questions
or do you want
advice? It's just it was a simple
question. And I'll go into that in a
second, but it speaks to this broader
thing of like what is it that the person
actually wants right now from you. So we
usually react to something from like a a
complete programming like, oh, when
somebody comes with a problem, we go and
solve the problem. When somebody says,
I'm hungry, we cook. Like or or when
somebody says, I'm hungry, we say like,
well, [__] food's in the fridge. Like
what whatever. We have a program that we
we run when somebody comes to us with X,
Y, or Z, but it's not particularly
always what the person who's coming to
us wants generally. And so so many
fights happen because somebody is
basically thinking that somebody wants
something when they don't want it. As a
matter of fact, I see this like in such
such a broad way where so many times I
see particularly husbands, but not
always, particularly husbands are
constantly trying to help their wife
solve a problem, which makes the wife
feel undermined and belittled, like I
don't need your [__] help. And then
they get resentful. And this whole thing
like gets and then like years of this
goes on and then the wife feels like
belittled and disempowered. And the
husband is like, "Wait, I do everything
I can to make her happy and she's still
not happy." Like like like
like and it's all because of this little
thing which is like she doesn't want
your help. She just wants to be
heard or she wants you to show her, not
do it for her or whatever it is like and
vice versa. This happens often like the
man will also be like, "Hey, I just want
a little [__] help." and she's like
saying, "Yeah, it's really hard when
your boss does that." Like, "No, I want
you to like give me some advice or so it
it works both ways." And and so it's
just really important to ask just be
really intentional and say, "What is it
that you want?" And that's what Terry
and I would do is like when a discussion
would happen and I would like have some
response and I would see she get a
little cranky at me, I would be like,
"Okay, wait, wait, wait. Do you want
what do you want? Do you want me to just
listen? do you want me to give you some
advice? You want some questions? And
then she would do the same thing. And we
had this particular thing around that
where we realized that what we almost
never wanted was the other person to
coach us or to be our psychiatrist. It's
like no, we want to we want each other
to be with each other. Like I just want
you to be with me. I don't want you to
try to fix
me. And today we'll occasionally say,
"Oh, I'd really like some coaching." And
it'll happen like once every two months
or something like that. that I want your
but it's it's it's like we really found
it found a very clear boundary with
ourselves that of like oh we don't
really want that we rather just have
somebody with us listening to us maybe
sometimes helping us solve a problem or
asking really good questions but never
like in that mode of trying to to
fix and and so that was a big eye
openener but it was just it all started
with this very simple simple thing which
was do you want me to just listen do you
want questions do you want advice
And one of the coolest things was at the
beginning the listening was
like so hard. I'm like, "All right, I
got advice. I got
advice." Like there's this like video on
YouTube with like this woman with a nail
in the head. And she's like, "I just
want to talk about having a nail in the
head." He's like, "Can I just remove the
nail in the head?" He's like, she's
like, "No, I just wanted this is just
painful." And that's how I felt. I felt
so freaking frustrated. I was like,
And now it's like, "Oh, this is so
easy." Like, I don't have to do [__] I
can just sit there and be loving and
listen to her and she will sort out the
whole thing herself. Like, she'll just
talk and then all of a sudden she'll
know what the [__] to do and then the
whole thing will be resolved and it's
like this lovely thing. And I I used to
think I had to do so much. I like I had
this feeling of like I'm responsible for
her happiness. And now it's like, oh no,
like I can just be with her. It's just
that easy. And it's it's it's so much so
much nicer of a
relationship. So the deal
is that it's sometimes very hard to find
out who's having the emotion when you're
like deeply empathetic, right? So I call
empathy, it's like being with somebody
without being in somebody. But oftent
times we find ourselves in somebody. So
the classic example of this is that I uh
I had this uh CEO that I was working
with and super logical, super logical
and would just make these like really
really great arguments and I would just
buy into these arguments that they were
making. And then one day I'm like wait a
second that that [__] didn't make any
sense. Like that [__] didn't make any
sense at all. And so I started doing the
research and I found out actually that
people who are highly logical, very very
thoughtful people often are more
logically
inconsistent than people who aren't
highly intellectual and they have less
of a capacity to see
it. And I was like, "Wow, that's really
strange because they they have a harder
time emotionally feeling the
inconsistency is my theory." And so
anyways, what was happening is they were
very convicted to the thought. They
really really really believed it and I
was empathizing and I was like, "Yeah,
I'm I also feel your conviction. Yes,
you must be right." And so I wasn't
listening. And and now I can see this
all the time. I can see these very
emphatic, very logical people making and
like watch news, you can see it making
these completely irrational, but
everybody's buying in because they're
empathetically they bought in. they're
in the other
person. And so this happens in lots of
different ways. For instance, somebody
can be really anxious and then all of a
sudden you're like, "Wait, I wasn't
nervous about that 10 minutes ago and
now I'm really nervous about that." And
so in a relationship, this can be
incredibly challenging as you're finding
out right now. Like it can be incredibly
challenging because you don't know where
you begin and they end. Like are they
sad? Are you sad? like what's actually
happening here. So there's a great trick
on this which is just putting 10% of
your attention 20% of your attention in
your
body as soon as you can feel your own
system. So not all of your attention is
in them but you're attuning to
yourself. Then you can attune to them in
a real way. When you're fully in them
you bought into their story. You've
bought into their emotional experience.
You're feeling their story. You're
feeling the emotional experience. But if
you attune to yourself and then you can
see them for what's actually going on.
Oh, they're really convinced of this.
Oh, they're illogical in this. Oh,
they're really sad. And then you can
actually be with them. You don't have to
be in them. And the weird thing is that
what I noticed is that when people are
bought into the story, like you see this
all the time where like friends are
saying, "Oh, he's such an asshole." And
I was like, "Yeah, he's such an
asshole." and they all kind of like nod
and then they walk away from the
conversation. They might feel a little
better for a little while, but like 10
of those conversations later, they all
feel like [__] all the time after these
conversations. We've all had the friend
that's like, "I don't even want to go
over to the friend's house cuz they're
just going to [__] about the boyfriend
again." It's like the same old routine
story. Whereas, if you're
actually with them, oh, I see that you
really think that they're an [__]
Oh, what's going on? like and being
curious about that instead of buying
into the story, then there's a lot more
room for the transformation, which is
what fighting is all about. Fighting is
all about figuring out how you can
transform together. And if you're in the
person, it's very hard to see yourself.
It's very hard to have any kind of
transformation.
So the other thing that happens is that
often times as we talked about you have
this relationship and usually one
person's more logical, they feel like
they're more right and the other person
is more emotional and they're more
empathetic. That's that's a standard,
not always, but it's a standard dynamic.
And so that's how that works to some
degree is that the empathetic person is
like, "Oh, they feel like they're right
and I'm feeling them, so they must be
right." Right? And so that's like part
of the thing that makes it all so
convoluted. So just putting some
attention in yourself allows you to be
in your own system. And this also helps
you like calm your nervous system down
when you're in the fight. Putting a
little attention in yourself separates
you from them in a way that allows you
to actually be with them and it calms
your nervous system. So it's just like a
really cool hack, especially for the
empathetic people like you.
I remember when we were doing the the
facilitation, there would always be
somebody who
would be passive aggressive. When we
started, we were doing these 24 person
things like live in San Francisco. And
there was always somebody who somehow or
another felt like they were being
oppressed by the situation as if they
couldn't leave and they would start
being really passive aggressive.
And our um rule of thumb was when we'd
say it at the beginning once we figured
it out, we'd say like if we see someone
being passive aggressive, we're gonna
ask you to be just outright aggressive
and like just yell and get mad at us and
tell us like tell us your boundaries or
whatever it was. And that was our rule
of thumb because it was such a hard
thing to to like sort out. And one of
the reasons we found out it was such a
hard thing is because a lot of times
people who are being passive aggressive
don't know they're being passive
aggressive. So a great example of
passive aggression is guilt, right? Like
guilting somebody is such a passive
aggression thing. Like you want them to
change. You're trying to get them to
change. You're using an emotion to to to
get them. It's an aggressive act, but
you get to play the victim while you're
guilting, right? You're like, "Oh, poor
me." And it's such a hard thing. And now
granted, there are some people, and I
remember watching this film where all
these moms, it was like a documentary
sort of thing. All these moms were
talking around and bragging how good of
guilt trippers they were. They're like,
I'm the best guilt tripper. Like, this
is how I do it. This is the tone. I
know. And that's what I did. I was like,
[__] gross. I was like, wait, they
know they're doing this. They're doing
this. and they know like and the truth
is that sometimes they know they're not
but sometimes they don't. It's like
sometimes very hard for people to see
that they're being passive aggressive
because their identity is so entrenched
in I'm the one that's oppressed or I'm
the victim that they can't see that
they're e but the truth about us as
people is that nobody likes to be told
what to do. We all resist. It's just how
openly we resist, right? And we know
this because like the voice in the head,
if you have a critical voice in the head
and the critical voice in the head is
like, "You should do upup up." And they
it gets really shitty at you. Notice the
reaction is usually some form of passive
aggressive because you haven't done
everything the voice in the head has
told you to do. You're like, "Yeah, [__]
off. I'm not doing that." Or, "Yeah,
you're right. I should do that, but
really, [__] off. I'm not doing that."
And so that's what happens when somebody
feels oppressed. They're going to move
into passive aggression. if they don't
feel safe enough to be completely
aggressive and just say no, I'm not
doing that or draw the boundary. The way
to think about passive aggression, so
it's like easy to see, it's like if
somebody is doing something
subconsciously or not subconsciously
to change
you in a passive way, that's passive
aggression, right? So, it's being mean
while pretending to be nice. It is guilt
tripping. It is um uh nagging is a form
of passive aggression. It's it's
anything where the person feels like
they don't have control, but they're
still exerting control. And when you see
that, it's okay to draw the same
boundary that you would if somebody's
being yelling at you or being completely
aggressive, which is, hey, I'm not going
to do that. And I remember with my
parents, my poor
parents, some point I called them up and
I was like, they were just constantly
criticizing me. It was a form of passive
aggression. And I said, "Hey, I love
you. I like coming home, but every time
I come home, you criticize me."
And I don't why I wouldn't do that. I
wouldn't do that with anybody else in
the world. Nobody else in the world
would I be like, "Sign me up to go over
to their house and be criticized for
[__] 30 minutes or 2 hours or for a
half a day. I'm just not doing it. So, I
love you. I want to come over to your
house, but I'm I'm not going to do that
until you can agree to stop criticizing
me when I come
over." They didn't call me for like 18
months. I think it was like 18 months.
There was like silence and then they
were like, "Okay, we miss you enough." I
guess they didn't say it that way, but
they were like, "Okay." And then like
the criticism pretty much stopped in the
family. And so it's the same thing as if
like I came home and my dad yelled at me
all the time, I would say, "Hey, I'd
love to see you, but it's not okay for
you to yell at me." Which I did at a
different time in my relationship with
my dad. So it's drawing that boundary.
And if you are the one that realizes
you're being passive aggressive, like
you have resentment, then the thing to
do is to move that anger to like let the
anger go to express it. Not at the
person, not in an abusive way, but to
just fully express that anger and then
draw the boundary that you need to draw
instead of feeling like you can't draw
the boundary and you can't move the
anger. which is that lack of
empowerment, that lack of sovereignty,
that lack of agency is the thing that
makes somebody passive aggressive. They
don't feel like they can actually get
what they want and so they have to do it
in a backhanded
way. Okay, we had a a fridge breakdown
and I was just like, I'm gonna get it
done. I'm buy this fridge. So, because
like we need a fridge. So, I just went
out, bought the fridge, got the fridge,
and it was not the fridge that Tara
wanted, and Tara wanted like a silent
fridge, and she wanted to do the
research, and I was just like, and um,
you know, maybe once a week for the
first six months, I heard about the
problems with the fr I can't sleep cuz
the fridge is so [__] loud. Like, it
was just like this undercurrent in our
life about the fridge. It was like the
fridge could do no right in the house.
like there was like there's like there's
like it didn't matter if it kept the
food cold, it was still a shitty fridge.
And
uh and there was this, you know, it was
resentment. It was this underlying
resentment.
And you know, in Tara's mind at the
time, I remember I'd be like, "Can you
please stop like beating me up over the
fridge?" And she's like, "I'm not
beating you up. I'm like I I'm not like
thinking you're wrong about it. I I'm
thinking that I'm wrong about it. Like
and it was this very confusing thing
because there's a time in our
relationship where it was very clear
anything like that would be my fault.
But it it became this thing where it was
it was still in her mind and she didn't
want to blame me for it, but it was just
there and it was like uh and what we
realized was that she was just really
angry about the fridge. And because she
hadn't fully gotten to express that
anger, it just showed up as this
resentment. And the earlier form of
resentment in the early part of our
relationship would have just been blame.
It would have been blah blah blah. But
there was still this kind of resentment.
It was almost like she resented herself
for not standing up and saying, "No,
Joe, don't buy the goddamn fridge. I
have a very specific fridge I want and
we're going to buy that fridge or
whatever it was." And we started to
realize that like, oh, whenever
resentment was there in the
relationship,
um that there was an anger, there was
some sort of frustration, that
resentment was kind of a a sign of a
repressed anger that was happening. And
oftentimes the person doesn't feel
safe, you know, showing that anger
because I I went out and I bought the
damn fridge and I did all this work and
like, well, I'm going to be ungrateful
for him for taking care of the fridge
or, you know, and then then I'm going to
get angry at him and I've mentioned him
many times and he's already angry about
it and like it's just going to blow up.
And so the way that resentment typically
works is that one person is taking care
of another
person in some way that they don't want
to be taken care of, i.e. the fridge.
And then the person starts resenting
them, right? Like, hey, don't make me
small. Don't disempower me. Don't make
my decisions for me. Don't think that
you have to save me all the time. And
then that resentment starts happening
and it builds and it builds and then it
typically will become passive aggressive
you know behavior which we can talk
about later but and that's the
resentment that's there and what's
actually happening is that there's an
anger there's like hey like and the
anger isn't it is anger but the anger is
pointing at a boundary so it's angera d
I'm like don't [__] take care of me
whatever it is don't buy the goddamn
fridge until you talk to me or whatever
But underneath that, that anger is a
boundary, right? This is this is how I
want to interact with you. The important
thing to know is that that's really the
thing that's happening under resentment
is one person's caretaking somebody and
the other person's getting resentful.
And a couple ways to know that this is
happening in your relationship. One is
that you get in fights over little
things that like aren't at all like
relevant. If you notice you don't want
to come home or you're bummed about when
they're coming home, then the resentment
is fully gone in the relationship. And
so what that means when fighting is that
oftent times whatever you're fighting
about is going to be like um saturated
by this resentment. Meaning that you're
actually fighting about two things at
the same time. I'm we're having a fight
over the fact that like my career and
your career don't match and how are we
going to do that? And we're also
fighting about the fact that you never
clean the [__] coffee maker. It's
going to complicate every fight that
you're in. It's going to make the fights
harder and harder to get to a resolution
where you both feel like you've evolved.
You both feel like you've changed and
grown. And so it's really important to
address those resentments. And the best
way to do that is the person who's
holding the resentment is to move some
anger, draw some boundaries, and get
that because oftentimes the resentment
lingers because the boundary hasn't been
drawn, right? Like if you can draw the
boundary, then why do you have to hold
on to it? Because you're okay for the
future. It's the fact that you don't
feel like you can draw that boundary
that makes it so that you have to hold
on to this
resentment. I'm hanging out with my mom.
My dad's supposed to meet us at dinner.
He was like five minutes late, which he
seldom was. And my mom was like, I think
full panic attack. That's how I was
raised with time. So, you can imagine I
have like some trauma with time. One
day, we were doing a groundbreakers. We
were doing like our week-long program.
And um I said, I need help with this. I
when I'm in this trauma, I need to hear
something that pulls me out of the
trauma. I think it was
Janine who came up with the expression,
I see how much you care. And it just
dissolved my rush because that's what it
was all about as a kid, right? Like it
it it attuned to my trauma in this very
particular way that was like, I see you.
I see that you care, that you're
trying. And and it was that not being
seen in that that that all the rush was
about. I was rushing so that I could be
seen in that and I was never getting
seen in that. And that's what happens
when we're in fights. When we're in
fights like
this, it's it's we are in our trauma and
we're not being seen the way we weren't
being seen as a kid. And now we're
making it really hard to be seen. Like I
was making it really hard to be seen
that I was in my drama when I'm freaking
out and rushing the kids and honking the
horn and like come on, we're late for
the party or whatever the hell. Like all
anyone can see is that I'm being a dick,
right? So like it's it was really hard
for anyone to see it. And that's the
same like just boom that just all of a
sudden did this thing to me like oh I
see how much you care and it just
dissolved it. And so when you're in a
fight it's really important to
especially in those agreements we talked
about how do you look at the kind of
those repeating trauma patterns and how
do you attune to each
other? If I start crying what's the
attuned
response? Is it to just be next to me?
Is it to have a a thing on my on my
knee? Is it to say, "I'm right here with
you?" What is the thing that you
actually want? And it'll take many
iterations to find the thing that like
actually like gets you. But you can find
that thing. So, as you're getting in
fights with your partner and you start
seeing these repeating patterns, it's
really important to sit down and have
those conversations. Say, "I notice
every time, let me see if I can find a
one, another one that happened with us."
Um, right. It's like,
uh, when you don't feel heard, I noticed
that when you don't feel heard, you just
continue to argue the point like
forever. And even if I'm saying, "Hey, I
hear you and this is what you said." If
you like, you're in your trauma. This
isn't about what's actually happening in
this moment. You're just like in this
thing. What's the what's the thing that
I can say to
you? And and I remember this one. Terra
was just like, "I just need to hear I'm
right. You're right. You're absolutely
100% right." Like, "Yep, you're right."
And boy, I had a problem with that one
at first. I was like, "I want to be
right." But I realized like, oh, that
it's not about being right or not being
right. What it's about is that she's in
her trauma. And when she was a kid, she
was always made wrong. And she just
needed to be told, "Oh, hey, I'm I'm I'm
right." Or, "Oh, if you're feeling
scared, you don't need me to fix you.
You just need to be physically held. You
just need to be like embraced in a like
a strong way. So you're looking for what
are the trauma patterns that you get in.
We all know we get in them in a
relationship. It's those repeated fights
and it's like what is that attuned
response? And you can try to guess at
your partner's response, like the
attuned response, and you can be
attuned, but trauma is weird because
you're being attuned to something that's
actually not happening right now. It's
happening in the past, like we
discussed. So, it's really important to
like sit down with your partner and like
talk about like what what is it? What do
you most want in that moment? In that
moment when you're [__] like feeling
like I'm not that you're all alone in
the relationship and I don't get you.
Like what is it that you want me to
say? What's the thing that you want most
that you never got as a kid? Like what
is that? And and you learning what that
is and to be able to give it to them.
You can't you can't give it to them if
it feels like [__] to you, right? Like I
couldn't say you were right for a while
until I until I got it into my bones
what it was actually.
But it was it's really important that
you can do that if you're capable of it
and if you want to and if you're not to
figure out what it is in you that makes
it so you don't want to support them in
that way. But if it doesn't feel right,
don't do it. But if you can do that,
it's really important to have that very
attuned response to that repeating
trauma that's happening in the fights.
You know that classic sitcom moment
where like there's like the tough guy
and he's trying to say I'm sorry and
he's like
I'm you know like that moment
like I was that guy. I was like the idea
of apology was absolutely something that
I was never going to do unless it was
like one of the most hardcore cases. And
I remember a therapist that we were
seeing was like, "Oh, no. Like apologies
should be all the time. Like, say I'm
sorry. Like literally, I'm I'm sorry
that you didn't understand what I was
saying to you. Like I was like, but
that's not my
fault." And she's like, "What does fault
have to do with an apology?" And I
remember like, "What the what?" Like I
remember that. And where what how it
finally landed with me was that I
thought apologies were just something
that was there to make you feel ashamed.
Right? Cuz as a kid, what I got taught
was say you're sorry, right? It was it
wasn't like there was an authentic
apology coming out of my system. It was
you're supposed to say you're sorry
whenever you do something that I don't
like. Like basically you it's like
that's someplace you should be ashamed
so you should say sorry. And so I had to
learn all over again especially in
fights I had to learn how to apologize
in an upright way not in a shame way
because at this point in my journey I
realized that like anytime I felt shame
it was a stagnant emotion right which is
why fights stagnate. The shame is
keeping that pattern in place over and
over again. And so I was like, I'm not
doing shame. And for me to realize like,
oh, there's such a thing as a shamefree
apology. And I think I think we have a
podcast on shamefree apologies if you
ever want to listen to it because it you
can go deep on this. But the idea is
that when you do an apology, it's an
upright apology. Meaning you're not
making yourself small. You're not making
yourself ashamed. And you're doing it in
such a way that you're saying, "Oh, this
is genuinely what I don't want to do. I
don't want to treat I don't want to yell
at you like this. I don't want to guilt
trip you. I don't want to threaten you
or whatever. It's like and so I'm very
sorry for doing that. That's not how I
want to be with you. That is what
instead of like I'm, you know, I'm sorry
that I I did that thing and I I won't do
it again. Like that's like a very
demeaning thing and it also is going to
make it's going to be shameful and so
you're going to repeat it. Whenever I
see apology like that, I'm like that
behavior is happening again, right? And
you see it all the time like in the
abusive relationships. I'm sorry. It
wasn't me. I'm not going to do it. Like
they feel so ashamed. You know that
shit's going to happen
again. And the reverse of the apology is
really cool, too, is that if you make an
upright apology and you say, "Hey, I'm
sorry for doing this. This isn't how I
want to be with you." It reduces the
chances of that behavior happening
again. It's an amazing thing. It's like
one of the most powerful tools I know
for changing behavior is to apologize in
an upright way for the behavior that
you've done. So apologies are this great
way to heal from a fight. It's a great
way to say this behavior isn't going to
happen as much or at all
anymore. But it's also a a great way to
respect somebody else to say like hey I
respect you enough to say and to hold
myself into account without shame. Now,
there's another kind of apology that
there's a lot of therapists that really
like this. We experimented with it for a
while, Tara and I. I do like it. We
don't use it as much anymore, but it was
really useful for a while, which is the
apology of hey, I'm I'm sorry that
you're feeling disconnected right now or
I'm sorry that you've had a hard day or
I'm sorry, and it's not a sorry like I'm
responsible sorry, but it's saying, hey,
I acknowledge you're having a bad day.
It's not what I want for you. Hey, the
car [__] went [__] and I'm sorry
that's not what I want for you. Like
it's just saying, hey, I'm I'm right
here with you. And it's such a sweet
thing to do. It's like such a sweetness
of saying like I acknowledge that that
kind of sucked and I'm right here with
you. And so it allows the relationship
to show that it's like I'm with you and
I also acknowledge that that's yours.
It's not for me to take care of. I can
just be here with you in it instead of
like come in and try to fix the whole
thing and then disempower you. And so
both of those apologies are really nice.
Use them for as much as you want. But
that upright apology like I will I look
forward to I can't wait to find a place
where I can apologize because I know how
transformative that apology is for me
and how healing that apology can be. But
it just can't have that shame. If it has
the shame, it's just going to stagnate
that pattern in place. So, it's always
in this very upright place where you're
like taking into account and you're
being completely in your own agency when
it comes to apologies.